ID	Description	Indicator	Responsible parties
A1	Develop list of carbon offset opportunities taking into account the key considerations set out in Key Considerations for Carbon Offsetting.	Initial list produced and published	Newcastle City Council
A2	Ensure that representatives on the Tyne and Wear Pensions Fund continue to lobby for further disinvestment in fossil fuels.	Commitment and agreed actions from Tyne and Wear Pension Fund	Newcastle City Council and Tyne and Wear Pensions Fund
A3	Explore whether a city-scale carbon insetting programme would be suitable for Newcastle, and gauge interest from local organisations, businesses and residents.	Feasibility study conducted and published	Newcastle City Council
A4	Further develop Key Performance Indicators and Local Metrics of Performance.	Initial list produced and published	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University and Northumbria University
A5	Continue to engage with all members of the city through the Climate Change Convention. Hold additional Climate Change Summits, including a Youth Summit.	Climate Change Summits held	Newcastle City Council
A6	Improve over time local emission monitoring (either directly or via indicators) to improve the accuracy of Newcastle's emissions inventory.	Improvements to be logged via the CDP emission disclosure platform	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University and Northumbria University
A7	Promote and encourage uptake of the Net Zero Pledge and associated local low carbon action by city residents and businesses.	Number of Net Zero Pledges by category (individual, young people and businesses)	Newcastle City Council and all city residents, young people and businesses
A8	Prepare for and seek to implement as many Net Zero projects as possible by COP-26 in November 2021 to demonstrate Newcastle's climate leadership.	Number of priority actions completed by COP26 in November 2021	All responsible parties
A9	Continue to engage at local, regional, national and international forums to learn lessons, access funding and deliver resources to key Net Zero actions.	Continuous action - no defined performance indicator	All responsible parties
A10	Engage with local and regional businesses and business forums on Green Growth and how best to maximise the benefits to the city.	Local business engagement analysis and potentially output from NELEP (or alternative) low carbon sector studies	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, Newcastle Gateshead Initiative / Invest Newcastle, NE1, among others
A11	Engage in and promote new forums and routes for research, development, innovation and pilot programmes in the low carbon sector across the city.	Secured low carbon research funding	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, local businesses, among others
A12	Work with city higher education providers and education partners to prepare for, and support, a low carbon skills transition.	Number of training programmes, training providers and courses run in low carbon skills and potentially output from skills analysis conducted as part of NELEP (or alternative) low carbon sector studies	Newcastle College Group, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, North of Tyne Combined Authority, Newcastle City Council and local training and skills providers
A13	Provide business support to SMEs in the city through a Green Growth delivery strand of the Business and IP Centre (BIPC) Newcastle.	Establishment of Green Growth delivery strand and establishment of provision of service	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, Newcastle Gateshead Initiative / Invest Newcastle, NE1, among others
A14	Actively promote climate change action, learning, research, idea generation and leadership through the Students in Newcastle Forum (SiNF).	Initial engagement and feedback from SiNF, and established ongoing programme of engagement	Newcastle University, Northumbria University and Newcastle City Council
A15	Each January, prepare an annual update for the previous year, and a concise forward plan for the next year of actions taken through the Net Zero Newcastle programme.	Annual update prepared and published	Newcastle City Council (with input from city partners)
A16	Monitor, prepare for and submit grant and other funding applications to deliver on the city's Net Zero commitment, with an immediate priority to stimulate economic growth and job retention and creation.	Secured grant and other funding	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, local businesses, among others
A17	Support city partners in making successful applications for grant, research and other funding.	Secured low carbon research funding	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, local businesses, among others
A18	Look beyond grant funding by working with public and private sector partners to develop pathways to commercial deployment and mass roll-out of low carbon measures.	Establish business cases for investment-grade low carbon interventions and identificaiton of routes to non-grant funded commercial deployment	All responsible parties
A19	Working with the Youth Democracy Group (formerly the Youth Council), a Climate Change Youth Summit will be arranged.	Climate Change Youth Summit held	Newcastle City Council
A20	Explore opportunities to engage with school age children on Climate Change issues and solutions through the curriculum, by providing hands on Net Zero project ideas and supporting in their delivery.	Iniital delivery programme prepared and published	Newcastle City Council and local schools
A21	A Net Zero Champions approach to communicating key messages will be considered by the Citizen's Assembly.	Feedback from Citizen's Assembly	Citizen's Assembly / North of Tyne Combined Authority
A22	Work with trade unions, city-wide businesses and employers and business forums to support the transition to a low carbon / green economy in the city.	Local business engagement analysis and potentially output from NELEP (or alternative) low carbon sector studies	Newcastle City Council, trade unions, city-wide businesses and employers and business forums
A23	Use the tools at our disposal to promote our key 'Asks of Government' (see orange box to the right) either directly to decision makers, through consultations, or via collective advocacy groups.	Asks of Government' update in annual report	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, business forums, among others
E
E1	Work with Northern Powergrid and Northern Gas Networks to assess and identify the best route to deliver Net Zero in the energy sector.	Periodic updates on progress and market / sector changes to the Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Northern Powergrid and Northern Gas Network
E2	Monitor developments in the national and international energy sector to identify new and / or promising emerging technologies and applications to deliver Net Zero.	Periodic updates on progress and market / sector changes to the Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council and other relevant interested stakeholders
E3	Continue to work to eliminate fuel poverty through installation of energy efficiency measures and provide ongoing advice and support to fuel poor residents.	Maintain record of number of installations completed	Newcastle City Concil,  Your Homes Newcastle and other housing associations
E4	Work with private sector partners and housing organisations to deploy available Green Homes Grant and other funding streams to as many properties as possible within the city.	Access to Government record of number of applicants to Green Homes Grant	Government / Office of National Statistics
E5	Engage with the private rented sector to ensure adherence with the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standard (MEES) and support where possible implementation of low carbon measures to deliver EPC improvements.	Maintain record of number of installations completed	Newcastle City Council
E6	Develop Newcastle GREEN (GIS-based Renewable Energy and Energy efficiency Network) website and promote uptake of low carbon measures to all property owners (domestic and non-domestic).	Launch of Newcastle GREEN	Newcastle City Council and city partners
E7	Through the planning process, require and encourage developers to design and build properties that are fit for the future and conform fully with Policy CS16 (Climate Change).	Adherence to policy requirements to be checked	Newcastle City Council
E8	Continue to support local SMEs with access to energy audits and energy grants through the Business Energy Savings Team (BEST) project.	BEST project outcome reports	Newcastle City Council and partner authorities in Gateshead, North Tyneside, Northumberland and Sunderland.
E9	Seek to expand the existing provision to local SMEs to have access to energy audits and energy grants through expansion of the BEST project.	Securing  additional funding for BEST project	Newcastle City Council and partner authorities in Gateshead, North Tyneside, Northumberland and Sunderland.
E10	Promote through all suitable means, small scale renewable energy generation and self consumption in domestic and non-domestic properties.	Increasing levels of Microgeneration Certified Schemes (MCS) accredited installations	Government / Office of National Statistics and Ofgem
E11	Apply for funding for a pilot project for a Neighbourhood Virtual Power Plant.	Secured grant and / or other funding	Newcastle City Council and partner organisations for pilot project
E12	Continue to develop world-leading programmes of research and investment into enhanced renewable energy generation and storage and improving efficiency of generation through our universities.	Additional research programmes	Newcastle University, Northumbria University and other research bodies
E13	Encourage uptake of renewable energy by preparing a Planning Process Note which sets out when installations are likely to benefit from Permitted Development and when they will need to secure the necessary planning approvals.	Planning Process Note produced and published	Newcastle City Council
E14	Working with our delivery partner E.ON, deliver the BEIS funded Electrification of Heat Demonstration Project and learn lessons that can be applied in future heat pump roll out projects.	Feedback report to BEIS with lessons  learned	E.ON and Newcastle City Council
E15	Develop a delivery plan for wide-scale deployment of heat pumps to homes addressing key barriers such as supply chain issues, training of heat pump engineers, cost reductions, understanding of the technology, etc.	Initial delivery plan produced and presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council and Northern Powergrid
E16	Monitor closely developments in the hydrogen sector and the potential for hydrogen to play an increasing role in our Net Zero heat / gas supply future.	Periodic updates on progress and market / sector changes to the Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council and Northern Gas Network
E17	Work with Engie through the Regenerate Newcastle Partnership to deliver District Energy Network and associated projects within the city, creating an expanded and increasingly integrated low carbon heat system.	Development and delivery of investment-grade District Energy Network projects	Regenerate Newcastle Partnership
E18	Prepare for and deliver an ambitious programme of Public Sector Decarbonisation of anchor institutions property portfolios via the forthcoming funding mechanism.	Development and delivery of investment-grade Public Sector Decarbonisatoin projects	Newcastle City Council, Northumbria University, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle College Group, and other public sector bodies
E19	Ensure that all new buildings and major capital programmes embed low carbon and renewable heat and electricity measures into their design and construction.	Establish and implement minimum requirements and standards for new buildings and capital programmes	Newcastle City Council, Northumbria University, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle College Group, and other public sector bodies
E20	Explore options for increasingly smart energy systems which adopt 'time of use' and 'flexible demand' approaches to energy consumption.	Initial concept for smart energy systems and applications within city presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle University and Newcastle City Council
E21	In preparing the updated Local Plan, key low carbon and national or international standards will be considered and assessed for suitability to be incorporated into city-wide planning policies.	Local Plan published and prepared incorporating low carbon standards	Newcastle City Council
E22	Use the tools at our disposal to promote our key 'Asks of Government' (see orange box to the right) either directly to decision makers, through consultations, or via collective advocacy groups.	Asks of Government' update in annual report	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, Northern Powergrid and Northern Gas Networks

T1	Develop detailed plans for a city-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision including 15 Minute City concept, Low Traffic Neighbourhoods and incorporating the Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan and School Streets initiative.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T2	Assess options and develop a plan for limiting growth in the number of private motorised vehicles in the city, to counter the impacts of population growth.	Summary report of options for limiting growth in motorised vehicles presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council
T3	Systematically develop and implement plans to remove private motorized vehicles from the city centre, commercial districts and sensitive part of the city.	Air Quality improvement plan produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council
T4	Implement the Clean Air Zone (category C) using secured funds.	Clean Air Zone (Category C) implemented and monitoring report conducted	Newcastle City Council
T5	Develop and implement an emissions based parking tariff in the city centre and key commercial districts.	Parking tariff structure developed and implemented	Newcastle City Council
T6	Assess the potential for wider deployment of car clubs within the city, based on Ultra Low Emission Vehicles. Ensure that access to travel options is enhanced in communities with low car ownership through community clubs as opposed to household ownership.	Plan for wider deployment of ULEV car clubs is prepared and published	Newcastle City Council
T7	Develop and implement additional School Streets initiatives.	Additional School Streets initiatives developed and implemented	Newcastle City Council
T8	Implement, and where possible enhance, the Healthy Pupil Capital Fund programme.	Healthy Pupil Capital Fund programme enhanced and implemented	Newcastle City Council
T9	Develop and implement schemes to reduce the dominance of cars in the city by reallocating road space to active travel and low carbon transport modes, whilst meeting vibrant high street and Covid-19 requirements.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T10	Implement a safe walking and cycling network to connect every school, to every park, to every district shopping centre, by implementing the key components of our Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T11	Work with Gateshead Council to implement a 12 month e-Scooter trial.  If successful, explore ways to extend and expand the scheme.e-	Scooter trial developed and implemented	Newcastle City Council and Gateshead Council
T12	Prepare a bold, detailed and high quality submission to the Government for the recently announced Zero Carbon City Centre scheme.	Submission of Zero Carbon City Centre bid	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, city centre businesses and other organisations, among others
T13	Work with Nexus and other city public transport operators to develop a city-wide plan for further improving transport integration and to develop and implement a Smart Ticketing system using the 'Pop' branded smartcard.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T14	Consider options for expansion of, and new sites for, Park & Ride schemes across the city. Develop and seek funding for Sustainable Park & Ride schemes.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T15	Enhance the information and payment systems available for passenger transport to enable a 'Mobility as a Service' approach to transport integration.	Information and payment system improvements for passenger transport implemented	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T16	Work with bus operators to improve bus lanes and bus priority through better co-ordinated traffic signals on key transport corridors to improve overall public transport networks.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T17	Assess options and the pros and cons of a bus franchising approach.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T18	Promote and support the transition towards ultra-low emission buses, taxis and freight vehicles operating within the city, including options such as cargo bikes.	Plan for ultra-low emission buses, taxis and freight vehicles to be prepared and published.  Key milestone implementation stages to be presented to Climate Change Committee.	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T19	If successful in grant funding bid to Office for Low Emissions Vehicles, implement a pilot scheme to provide 23 Electric Vehicle chargers in a number of areas of the city.	If successful, implementation of pilot scheme	Newcastle City Council
T20	Work with the North East Combined Authority (NECA) to renew, replace and expand the Electric Vehicle charging infrastructure across the city.  Complete procurement stages of NECA Electric Vehicle charging programme.	Key milestone implementation stages to be presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council and North East Combined Authority
T21	Develop an ambitious city-wide plan for the  rollout of Electric Vehicle infrastructure across the city.    Work with North East Combined Authority to deploy Rapid Chargers, particularly to encourage use by electric taxis.	City-wide Low Carbon Transport Vision produced and communicated to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, Nexus, transport operators, among others
T22	Work with the North East Freight Partnership and other relevant organisations to move freight away from road transport and to encourage the switch to zero emission vehicles.	Road transport and freight action plan to be presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council, local businesses, business forums, freight companies, among others
T23	Develop a plan for the city to implement Freight Consolidation Hubs and low carbon last mile freight deliveries, and assess practical implementation options, as well as seeking funding. Secure funding for Freight Consolidation Hubs.	Key milestone implementation stages to be presented to Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council
T24	Support other city low carbon transport projects such as the Metro rolling stock replacement programme, and work with city and regional partners to increase ambition in their transition to Net Zero.	Low carbon transport programmes from city and regional partners progressed from feasibility to implementation	City and regional transport organisations
T25	Ultra Low Emission Buses scheme.  Work with bus fleet operators to assess the necessary funding and to implement the infrastructure throughout the city to take 100% of buses to ultra low emission status.Application for necessary funding for buses  transition to 100% ultra low emission fleet.	Key milestone implementation stages to be presented to Climate Change Committee	Bus operators and Newcastle City Council
T26	Investigate options for hydrogen to play a future role in public transport in Newcastle.	Periodic updates on progress and market / sector changes to the Climate Change Committee	Newcastle City Council and transport operators
T27	Wherever suitable and appropriate, support the decarbonisation of Out of Boundary Transport Emissions by working with local, regional and national transport organisations.	Continuous action - no defined performance indicator	Newcastle International Airport, Transport for the North, National Rail, local maritime sector, among others 
T28	Use the tools at our disposal to promote our key 'Asks of Government' (see orange box to the right) either directly to decision makers, through consultations, or via collective advocacy groups.	Asks of Government' update in annual report	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, Nexus and transport operators

A&S1	Produce a guidance document for property owners that sets out a summary of the key planning policies that enable sustainable development and a simple guide to streamlining an application for low carbon initiatives.	Planning Process Note produced and published	Newcastle City Council
A&S2	Produce a Green and Sustainable Procurement guidance document for our city's businesses.	Sustainable Procurement  Note produced and published	Newcastle City Council
A&S3	Produce a template and guidance document for preparing a Sustainable Travel Plan, tailored to specific audiences / users.	Sustainable Travel Plan template and guidance document produced and published	Newcastle City Council
A&S4	Develop a Climate Change Adaptation Working Group including city organisations to identify key climate change risks and develop targeted and effective preparation, development and adaptation activities.	Establish Climate Change Adaptation Working Group	Newcastle City Council, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, Environment Agency, Northumbrian Water, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Urban Green, business forums, among others
A&S5	Prepare a Cold Weather Plan for Newcastle to address the city's response to protect residents and infrastructure from increasing severity and frequency of extreme weather events due to climate change.	Cold Weather Plan produced and published	Climate Change Adaptation Working Group
A&S6	Work with city-wide partners and stakeholders to develop a plan for enhancing flood defences along the Quayside to replace the temporary barriers that have been used as a defence mechanism to date.	Development of plans and progression of funding application	Environment Agency, Newcastle City Council, Northumbrian Water, NE1 and Groundwork
A&S7	Ensure that Newcastle has sufficient provision of open spaces and green infrastructure going forward.  An Open Spaces and Green Infrastructure Strategy will be prepared.	Open Spaces and Green Infrastructure Strategy produced and published	Newcastle City Council and Urban Green
A&S8	Submit a high quality bid to the Trees for Climate Programme to deliver a proposed North East Community Forest (NECF).  If successful, start woodland and tree creation at the earliest opportunity.	Submission of North East Community Forest bid	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, together with neighbouring local authorities
A&S9	If successful in the Urban Tree Challenge Fund, start woodland and tree creation at the earliest opportunity.	Planting and establishment of trees under the Urban Tree Challenge Fund	Newcastle City Council
A&S10	Implement low carbon measures and efficient resource management actions set out in the Waste Strategy Action Plan.	Waste Strategy Action Plan updates	Newcastle City Council
A&S11	Working with businesses and NE1 on experimental schemes to improve waste collection and recycling in the city centre, minimising its environmental impact.	Waste Strategy Action Plan updates	Newcastle City Council
A&S12	Continue working to deliver the Energy Recovery Facility to treat ‘residual waste’ that should ensure over 90% of waste is diverted from landfill, delivering improved sustainability and reduced carbon emissions.	Milestone delivery stages of the Energy Recovery Facility procurement and delivery	Newcastle City Council and other involved local authorities
A&S13	Develop plans to improve efficiency of resource management through waste (including food waste), water, materials and other resources, particularly where a circular economy can be achieved.	Increasing number of businesses operating and securing value from the local circular economy	Newcastle City Council, local businesses, business forums, among others
A&S14	Communicate personal sustainable actions to city residents to encourage significant uptake.	Number of Net Zero Pledges by category (individual, young people and businesses)	Newcastle City Council and all city residents, young people and businesses
A&S15	Work with project partners to develop an investment strategy which better protects Newcastle city centre from surface water flooding, taking into account climate change projections.	Surface Water Flooding Investment Strategy produced and published	Climate Change Adaptation Working Group
A&S16	Meet Newcastle’s target to better protect 578 households, including 358 currently at significant risk and 250 in the 20% most deprived areas, from surface water flooding by March 2026.	Surface Water Flooding Investment Strategy implementation key milestones	Climate Change Adaptation Working Group
A&S17	When the Council divests of land and property, encourage sustainable development options on the sites, such as sustainable construction methods and materials, low carbon heat and electricity sources, etc.	Inclusion of sustainable development options on divested land and property	Newcastle City Council
A&S18	Continue developing new plans to adapt to climate change effects including hot weather plans and surface water flooding plans.  Ensure best climate change practice is captured, including green-blue linkages.	Hot Weather Plan produced and published	Climate Change Adaptation Working Group
A&S19	Prepare comprehensive response to the Planning White Paper with city-wide position on incorporating green infrastructure and active travel infrastructure into new developments.	Submission of consultation response to Planning White Paper	Newcastle City Council
A&S20	Use the tools at our disposal to promote our key 'Asks of Government' (see orange box to the right) either directly to decision makers, through consultations, or via collective advocacy groups.	Asks of Government' update in annual report	Newcastle City Council, North of Tyne Combined Authority, North East Local Enterprise Partnership, Nexus and transport operators

